---
layout: post
title: "Designing a URL Shortening service like TinyURL"
author: "Rajat Srivastava"
categories: system-designs
tags: [design]
folder: tinyurl
difficulty: easy
---

Let's design a URL shortening service like TinyURL. This service will provide short aliases redirecting to long URLs. Similar services: bit.ly, goo.gl, qlink.me, etc.

## 1. Why do we need URL shortening?
URL shortening is used to create shorter aliases for long URLs. We call these shortened aliases “short links.” Users are redirected to the original URL when they hit these short links. Short links save a lot of space when displayed, printed, messaged, or tweeted. Additionally, users are less likely to mistype shorter URLs.

For example, if we shorten this page through TinyURL:

`https://rajat19.github.io/system-design`

We would get:

`http://tinyurl.com/jlg8zpc`

The shortened URL is nearly one-third the size of the actual URL.

URL shortening is used for optimizing links across devices, tracking individual links to analyze audience and campaign performance, and hiding affiliated original URLs.
   
If you haven’t used [tinyurl.com](http://tinyurl.com) before, please try creating a new shortened URL and spend some time going through the various options their service offers. This will help you a lot in understanding this chapter.

---
## 2. Requirements and Goals of the System
<div class="note">
    You should always clarify requirements at the beginning of the interview.<br>
    Be sure to ask questions to find the exact scope of the system that the interviewer has in mind.
</div>

Our URL shortening system should meet the following requirements:

**Functional Requirements:**
1. Given a URL, our service should generate a shorter and unique alias of it. This is called a short link.
2. When users access a short link, our service should redirect them to the original link.
3. Users should optionally be able to pick a custom short link for their URL.
4. Links will expire after a standard default timespan. Users should be able to specify the
expiration time.

**Non-Functional Requirements:**
1. The system should be highly available. This is required because, if our service is down, all the URL redirections will start failing.
2. URL redirection should happen in real-time with minimal latency.
3. Shortened links should not be guessable (not predictable).

**Extended Requirements:**
1. Analytics; e.g., how many times a redirection happened?
2. Our service should also be accessible through REST APIs by other services.

---
## 3. Capacity Estimation and Constraints
Our system will be read-heavy. There will be lots of redirection requests compared to new URL shortenings. Let’s assume `100:1` ratio between read and write.

**Traffic estimates:** Assuming, we will have 500M new URL shortenings per month, with 100:1 read/write ratio, we can expect 50B redirections during the same period:
<p class="estp">100 * 500M => 50B</p>
What would be Queries Per Second (QPS) for our system? New URLs shortenings per second:
<p class="estp">500 million / (30 days * 24 hours * 3600 seconds) = ~200 URLs/s</p>
Considering 100:1 read/write ratio, URLs redirections per second will be:
<p class="estp">100 * 200 URLs/s = 20K/s</p>

**Storage estimates:** Let’s assume we store every URL shortening request (and associated shortened link) for 5 years. Since we expect to have 500M new URLs every month, the total number of objects we expect to store will be 30 billion:
<p class="estp">500 million * 5 years * 12 months = 30 billion</p>
Let’s assume that each stored object will be approximately 500 bytes (just a ballpark estimate–we will dig into it later). We will need 15TB of total storage:
<p class="estp">30 billion * 500 bytes = 15 TB</p>

**Bandwidth estimates:** For write requests, since we expect 200 new URLs every second, total incoming data for our service will be 100KB per second:
<p class="estp">200 * 500 bytes = 100 KB/s</p>
For read requests, since every second we expect ~20K URLs redirections, total outgoing data for our service would be 10MB per second:
<p class="estp">20K * 500 bytes = ~10 MB/s</p>

**Memory estimates:** If we want to cache some of the hot URLs that are frequently accessed, how much memory will we need to store them? If we follow the 80-20 rule, meaning 20% of URLs generate 80% of traffic, we would like to cache these 20% hot URLs.
Since we have 20K requests per second, we will be getting 1.7 billion requests per day:
<p class="estp">20K * 3600 seconds * 24 hours = ~1.7 billion</p>

To cache 20% of these requests, we will need 170GB of memory.
<p class="estp">0.2 * 1.7 billion * 500 bytes = ~170GB</p>
One thing to note here is that since there will be a lot of duplicate requests (of the same URL), therefore, our actual memory usage will be less than 170GB.

**High level estimates:** Assuming 500 million new URLs per month and 100:1 read:write ratio, following is the summary of the high level estimates for our service:

<table class="estimation-table">
<tr><td>New URLs</td><td>200/s</td></tr>
<tr><td>URL redirections</td><td>20K/s</td></tr>
<tr><td>Incoming data</td><td>100KB/s</td></tr>
<tr><td>Outgoing data</td><td>10MB/s</td></tr>
<tr><td>Storage for 5 years</td><td>15TB</td></tr>
<tr><td>Memory for cache</td><td>170GB</td></tr>
</table>

---
## 4. System APIs
<div class="note">
    Once we've finalized the requirements, it's always a good idea to define the system APIs.
    <br>This should explicitly state what is expected from the system.
</div>

We can have SOAP or REST APIs to expose the functionality of our service. Following could be the definitions of the APIs for creating and deleting URLs:

```
createURL(api_dev_key, original_url, custom_alias=None, user_name=None, expire_date=None)
```

**Parameters:**
api_dev_key (string): The API developer key of a registered account. This will be used to, among other things, throttle users based on their allocated quota.
original_url (string): Original URL to be shortened.
custom_alias (string): Optional custom key for the URL.
user_name (string): Optional user name to be used in encoding. expire_date (string): Optional expiration date for the shortened URL.

**Returns:** (string)
A successful insertion returns the shortened URL; otherwise, it returns an error code.

```
deleteURL(api_dev_key, url_key)
```

Where “url_key” is a string representing the shortened URL to be retrieved. A successful deletion returns ‘URL Removed’.

**How do we detect and prevent abuse?** A malicious user can put us out of business by consuming all URL keys in the current design. To prevent abuse, we can limit users via their api_dev_key. Each api_dev_key can be limited to a certain number of URL creations and redirections per some time period (which may be set to a different duration per developer key).

---
## 5. Database Design
<div class="note">
    Defining the DB schema in the early stages of the interview would help to understand the data flow among various components and <br>later would guide towards data partitioning.
</div>

A few observations about the nature of the data we will store:
1. We need to store billions of records.
2. Each object we store is small (less than 1K).
3. There are no relationships between records—other than storing which user created a URL. 
4. Our service is read-heavy.

**Database Schema:**
We would need two tables: one for storing information about the URL mappings, and one for the user’s data who created the short link.
